---
title: Meet the Experts 
date: 2019-05-10
menu:
  main:
    parent: 'about'
weight: 2
---
__Dr. Marc Schlenoff__, a 1981 graduate of the University of Maryland Dental
School, practiced general and esthetic dentistry in New Jersey since 1985. He
has directed the Advanced Education in General Dentistry Program as Assistant
Professor of Dental Medicine in the Division of Prosthodontics. Dr. Schlenoff
completed all levels of the Rosenthal Institute Aesthetic Advantage, where he
has been a lecturer and clinical instructor for the past 12 years. He has also
taught hands-on courses for the American Academy of Cosmetic Dentistry, helping
dentists master esthetic dental techniques. As an attending dentist at
Morristown Medical Center, where he has trained dental residents in both
clinical dentistry and in practice management, Dr. Schlenoff was the recipient
of the first annual Morton Wertheimer Award for teaching excellence. Dr.
Schlenoff is affiliated with the New York Presbyterian Hospital-Weill Cornell
Medical Center, where he was honored as the Attending Dentist of the Year. The
Consumer's Research Council of America has named Dr. Schlenoff one of America's
Top Dentists for Cosmetic and Restorative care for ten consecutive years. Dr.
Schlenoff is an active member of the American Academy of Cosmetic Dentistry,
American Dental Association, and Academy of General Dentistry, where he is a
Fellow. He has published articles in Dental Economics and Inside Dentistry and
has completed a certificate program at Rutgers University in Essential Business
Skills for Dentists.

__Aimee Chiligiris, PsyD__ is a licensed clinical psychologist specializing in the
treatment of substance use disorders and co-occurring mental health concerns.
Dr. Chiligiris serves on the faculty as an Instructor in Clinical Psychology
(in Psychiatry) and sees patients at Columbia Doctors. Dr. Chiligiris completes
diagnostic assessments, engages in individual therapy, and facilitates
substance abuse groups. She completed her doctorate at The Chicago School of
Professional Psychology and internship and post-doctoral residency at Hazelden
Betty Ford Foundation, specializing in the treatment of adolescents and young
adults with co-occurring concerns and their families. She also received
training in psychodynamic psychotherapy, dialectal behavioral and motivational
interviewing approaches for treating co-occurring presentations. She has worked
with clients of all ages in a variety of levels of care including inpatient,
residential, day treatment, and outpatient settings. She has treated patients
struggling with mood disorders, anxiety, characterological concerns, substance
use disorders, disordered eating behaviors, and trauma related concerns. She
has served as adjunct faculty for a course on addictions and completed research
regarding building resilience for at-risk youth. Her special interests include
the assessment and treatment of co-occurring disorders in early adulthood. She
also has interest in working with patients to build motivation, connection and
skills in recovery, working with family members influenced by addiction, and
assessment and treatment planning for complex co-occurring presentations.

__Dr. Kareem Merrick__ graduated from Howard University College of Dentistry in
2009 earning a Doctor of Dental Surgery. During his tenure at Howard
University, he was a Minority Biomedical Research Support Program Scholar and a
Barbara Jordan Health Policy Scholar. Upon graduating from Howard University,
he completed his General Practice Residency at Interfaith Medical Center in
Brooklyn, New York in 2010. Dr. Merrick is currently the Dental Director of
Oral Health Service at BrightPoint Health, a Federally Qualified Health Center
serving the areas from The Bronx to Staten Island, with 23 operational sites
located in all 5 boroughs. Dr. Merrick has also served Instructor of Clinical
Dental Medicine at Columbia University College of Dentistry and New York
University Langone’s Advanced Education General Dentistry Programs. He engages
pre- and post-doctoral dental trainees in treating inner-city homeless and
low-income adults of inner-city homeless and provides care to special needs
children at Smile Savers Pediatric Dentistry in the Bronx.

__Burton Edelstein DDS MPH__, is professor of Dental Medicine and Health Policy &
Management at Columbia University where he chairs the Section of Population
Oral Health. He is also senior fellow in Public Policy and president emeritus
of the DC-based [Children’s Dental Health Project](www.cdhp.org), a nonprofit
policy organization that advances the oral health interests of children and
their families. A board-certified pediatric dentist, Dr. Edelstein practiced
pediatric dentistry in Connecticut and taught at Harvard before relocating to
Washington, DC, to serve as a Robert Wood Johnson Health Policy Fellow and
Health Legislative Aide to the U.S. Senate Minority Leader. From 2009 to 2014,
he served on the federal Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission
(MACPAC) that advises Congress, Agencies, and States on Medicaid and CHIP
policy. His academic and consulting contributions focus on public policies that
affect children’s oral health and their access to care. Through CDHP, he has
helped secure legislation and regulation for dental coverage in CHIP and Health
Reform (ACA) while protecting the dental benefit in Medicaid. His more than 100
publications include contributions to the peer-reviewed dental literature, book
chapters, commissioned papers, and policy documents.
